Project Gutenberg's La géométrie en vers techniques, by Lyon Des Roys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: La géométrie en vers techniques

Author: Lyon Des Roys

Release Date: September 9, 2008 [EBook #26566]

Language: French


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LA GÉOMÉTRIE EN VERS TECHNIQUES ***












LA GÉOMÉTRIE EN VERS TECHNIQUES,

Par DESROIS, ancien Doyen de Mortain.

Rien n'est beau que le vrai; le vrai seul est aimable.


A PARIS,

Chez l'AUTEUR, rue de la Loi, maison du Citoyen DARESTE, nº 74, près la
rue Faydeau.

An IX.--1801.




AVIS.


On est prévenu que tout ce qui ne se vendra pas chez l'Auteur sera
contrefait.




ÉPITRE DÉDICATOIRE A MES ÉCOLIERS.


    Chers Géomètres de Juilly,
    Pour qui mon coeur est tout rempli
    De bienveillance et de tendresse,
    C'est à vous que ceci s'adresse;
    C'est à vous que j'offre mes vers.
    Ils ne vous rendront point pervers:
    La rime en est quelquefois dure,
    Mais la vérité toujours pure;
    C'est-là leur seule qualité;
    C'est-là leur unique beauté.

    Il vous faudra quelque courage,
    Pour apprendre un pareil ouvrage.
    Mais enfin vous l'avez promis:
    Souvenez-vous en mes amis.
    Vous, dont la gloire m'intéresse,
    Ah! faites trève à la paresse.
    La paresse a bien des appas;
    Mais, sans gloire on n'existe pas:
    Le désir ardent de l'estime
    Nous fait faire un effort sublime.
    Cette estime, objet de vos voeux,
    Le besoin des coeurs généreux,
    Vous savez qu'on lui sacrifie
    Souvent jusqu'à sa propre vie:
    C'est-là le destin des héros;
    Elle sait payer les travaux
    De Bonaparte et d'Alexandre.
    Mais, bien plus, je dois vous apprendre
    Que le plaisir même, ici bas,
    Sans le travail ne s'obtient pas.
    C'est une vérité constante:
    Le reste trompe notre attente;
    Mais le travail a des douceurs
    Qui font oublier les rigueurs
    De la fortune et de l'envie;
    C'est le soutien de notre vie.
    Est-il besoin de vous montrer
    Tous les fruits qu'on en peut tirer?
    Être satisfait de soi-même,
    Repousser la pauvreté blême,
    Aux premiers emplois être mis,
    Recevoir chez soi ses amis,
    Élever, établir un frère,
    Venir au secours d'une mère;
    Tels sont ses fruits doux et charmans,
    Et tels sont, ô mes chers enfans,
    Les nobles plaisirs de la vie:
    Les autres ne sont que folie.




PRÉFACE.


LA Géométrie est si cultivée de nos jours, qu'il n'est presque plus
permis d'en ignorer les principes. Nos ouvrages modernes les présentent
avec une netteté et une précision qui ne laisse rien à désirer. Mais
plus ils sont conçus aisément, moins ils se gravent dans la mémoire; et
quelques années de distraction, ou d'une étude étrangère, suffisent
ordinairement pour les faire oublier.

C'est à cet inconvénient que j'ai voulu remédier[1]. Attaché à une
maison d'étude, où, conjointement avec les plus solides instructions,
l'art des vers est si heureusement cultivé[2], j'ai bien osé appeler cet
art au secours de la Géométrie; et, à force de lutter contre le plus
rebelle de tous les sujets, je suis parvenu à exprimer assez clairement
les principes les plus élémentaires. Heureux si l'utile se trouve où
l'agréable ne saurait être.

  [1] Sans doute, il y a de la folie à une pareille entreprise; mais si
    mes vers n'apprennent pas beaucoup de Géométrie à nos jeunes
    Français, peut-être apprendront-ils un peu de français à nos jeunes
    Géomètres: car on les accuse de négliger cette partie que nous
    regardions autrefois comme essentielle, et dont on fait encore
    beaucoup de cas à Juilly.

  [2] Nous avons vu cette année des Rhétoriciens de quinze ans mettre
    Virgile en vers français, dont nos Poëtes les plus consommés se
    feraient honneur. De tels Elèves font assez l'éloge du Collége de
    Juilly. Mais la plus grande gloire de cette maison célèbre, c'est
    d'avoir été de tous temps l'école des bonnes moeurs, et de ces
    principes salutaires qui sont les seuls garans incorruptibles de
    toute sagesse et de toute vertu.




LA GÉOMÉTRIE EN VERS TECHNIQUES.


    Sans surface est le point, le plan sans épaisseur;
    La ligne droite ou courbe est longue sans largeur:
    La raison le condamne, et la raison l'exige.
    La ligne droite au but constamment se dirige;
    Et c'est, par conséquent, devant tous les humains
    Entre deux points donnés le plus court des chemins.

    La courbe est, au contraire, une route incertaine,
    Qui vers le point quitté bien souvent me ramène;
    Mais elle a des vertus qui par-tout font du bruit:
    C'est le cercle d'abord qui me plaît et m'instruit.
    Voyez l'astre du jour en sa vaste carrière;
    Il promène avec pompe un cercle de lumière,
    Forme parfaite aux yeux, dont l'art du Créateur
    Sur nos savans esprits revendique l'honneur.

    J'établirai d'abord, comme lois générales,
    Que les arcques[3] égaux ont des cordes égales,
    Et que les plus grands arcs sont toujours sous-tendus
    Par les cordes aussi qui s'étendent le plus.
    L'angle, au centre placé par sa propre nature,
    Dans les degrés du cercle a trouvé sa mesure:
    L'aigu, l'obtus, le droit qui n'a point de rivaux;
    Opposés au sommets, ils sont toujours égaux.

  [3] C'est une licence que je prends à l'exemple des anciens poëtes,
    qui écrivaient _avecque_. Je prends encore celle de faire rimer les
    dérivés _angles_, _triangles_; _internes_, _externes_, &c.

    La perpendiculaire a confondu l'oblique;
    Je la démontrerai plus courte sans réplique,
    Et que chacun des points, mesuré dans son lieu,
    Des deux extrémités tient le juste milieu.

    A l'abri de l'envie, en compagnes fidèles,
    On voit marcher de front deux lignes parallèles;
    Mais l'oblique sécante, aussitôt survenant
    Va nous faire observer l'angle correspondant.
    Il sert à comparer les alternes internes,
    Egaux entre eux ainsi qu'entre eux sont les externes.
    Deux cercles se touchant en un point, quel qu'il soit,
    Leurs centres et le point sont sur un chemin droit.
    Si la corde au rayon est perpendiculaire,
    Elle est coupée en deux, et la part circulaire.
    Parallèles étant deux cordes, j'en conclus
    Que deux arcques égaux y seront contenus,
    Et que toute tangente à corde parallèle,
    Touche au milieu de l'arc sous-tendu par icelle.

    L'angle dont le sommet à la courbe se rend,
    A moitié des degrés de l'arcque qu'il comprend,
    Lorsqu'il est au dehors, le cas devient complexe,
    Du concave moitié, moins moitié du convexe;
    S'il est entre le centre et la courbe compris,
    Des moitiés des deux arcs les degrés seront pris.

    Avançant pas-à-pas, par des règles austères
    Des triangles égaux traçons les caractères.
    1º Entre côtés égaux un angle intercepté;
    2º Les deux angles égaux sur un égal côté;
    3º Les trois côtés enfin tous égaux l'un à l'autre,
    Satisfont sur cela mon esprit et le vôtre.
    Ces trois règles qui sont faciles à montrer,
    Dans d'autres vérités sauront nous faire entrer.
    Parallèles gissant entre deux parallèles,
    S'offrent par la seconde être égales entre elles.


POLYGONES

    Le nombre des côtés détermine le nom
    De chaque polygone ou régulier ou non.
    Il est, dans tous les cas, divisible en triangles:
    Comptez-en deux de moins que vous ne comptez d'angles;
    Et, prenant pour chacun cent quatre-vingt degrés,
    Vous en ferez la somme et la diviserez.
    Chaque ligue en un sens se trouvant prolongée,
    De tous leurs supplémens la figure est chargée.
    La somme de ceux-ci vaudra trois cent soixante,
    Entre eux et le total différence constante.
    Ensemble étant égaux les angles et côtés,
    Les polygones sont réguliers réputés.
    Dans le cercle toujours un tel polygone entre,
    Soit l'angle intérieur, soit l'angle dit au centre
    Est par ce que j'ai dit, aisément supputé,
    Rayon dans l'exagone est égal au côté.

    Veut-on un polygone à forme régulière,
    Qui, répété, recouvre une surface entière?
    Que du cercle complet l'angle soit diviseur.
    A l'heureux exagone accordez-en l'honneur.
    L'abeille l'a choisi: voyez-la qui dispose
    La case où se rendra le tribut de la rose;
    Elle vous instruit mieux que ma triste leçon.
    Quand pourrai-je en avoir autour de ma maison;
    Et, cultivant en paix mon coin de la Champagne,
    De leurs essaims nombreux enrichir ma campagne?
    Mais à d'autres travaux je me vois condamné.
    Rimons en attendant ce destin fortuné.


LIGNES PROPORTIONNELLES

    Coupant l'un des côtés d'un angle rectiligne
    En égales longueurs que le compas désigne,
    Et de chacun des points où l'on s'est arrêté
    Parallèles menant jusqu'à l'autre côté,
    Je soutiens celui-ci coupé depuis le faîte
    En parts qui sont aussi d'égalité parfaite.
    Si l'on prend nombre égal de ces égales parts,
    L'on aura sur chacun ou des tiers ou des quarts;
    Et divisant l'un d'eux au gré de son envie,
    Sur l'autre l'on aura la semblable partie:
    Le rapport que je cherche ainsi sera trouvé,
    Et je construis l'échelle au plan que j'ai levé.
    De-là nous passons droit aux triangles semblables
    Dont les propriétés sont inappréciables.
    On peut les reconnaître à trois signes certains
    1º Deux côtés comprenant même angle dans leurs seins,
    Et de qui les longueurs sont proportionnelles;
    2º Les trois faces ayant même rapport entre elles;
    3º Les trois angles égaux que l'on réduit à deux,
    Tels sont de leurs vertus les symptômes heureux.
    Je vais, par leur secours, bravant toute défense,
    D'inaccessibles lieux mesurer la distance;
    Je vais sans y monter vous dire avec rigueur
    Combien votre clocher peut avoir de hauteur.
    Ces jeux n'étonnent plus que les yeux de l'enfance:
    Nous avons des secrets de toute autre importance;
    Mais pour y pénétrer, il faut que vos esprits
    Du désir de savoir soient vivement épris.

    Le triangle rectangle et son hypothénuse
    Ont des propriétés que pas un ne récuse;
    La perpendiculaire allant à l'angle droit
    De nous les démontrer aura bientôt le droit.
    En deux extrêmes parts coupant l'hypothénuse
    C'est un terme moyen dont au besoin l'on use.
    Les deux côtés de plus sont moyens en tout temps
    Entre l'hypothénuse et chacun des segmens.
    Les cordes ont reçu le don non équivoque
    De se couper toujours en raison réciproque.
    Sécantes qui font angle en un point mitoyen,
    Font chacune un extrême et chacune un moyen,
    Ou réciproques sont aux parts extérieures.
    Les plus claires raisons sont toujours les meilleures.
    La perpendiculaire, au diamètre allant,
    Est moyenne aux deux parts, je le prouve à l'instant.
    De pareille vertu s'honore la tangente
    Entre un côté sortant et l'entière sécante.
    Deux figures étant semblables, sous sentez
    Que leurs contours entiers sont comme leurs côtés,
    Et qu'un même rapport règne sans différences
    Entre divers rayons et leurs circonférences.


LES SURFACES.

    Amour universel de la propriété,
    C'est par toi que notre art un jour fut inventé;
    Mais il n'est rien de bon où l'abus ne se glisse,
    Et souvent dans nos coeurs tu deviens avarice.
    Que ce vilain défaut chez nous soit ignoré.
    Pour commune mesure adoptons un quarré:
    Son côté, tour-à-tour placé sur chaque face,
    Du rectangle aisément nous produit la surface.
    Le parallélogramme au rectangle équivaut,
    Quand il est aussi large et qu'il n'est pas plus haut.
    Vous multiplierez donc la hauteur par la base;
    Opérez lestement, démontrez sans emphase,
    Et prenant simplement la moitié du produit,
    Au triangle déjà vous vous trouvez conduit:
    Puisqu'il est la moitié du parallélogramme,
    A mon secours, par-tout, c'est lui que je réclame.
    Le trapèze en a deux plus ou moins inégaux;
    Vous prendrez un moyen aux deux côtés rivaux:
    L'exagone en a quatre ou six en son enceinte,
    Et la surface courbe elle-même est atteinte.
    Le cercle est composé de triangles aigus,
    Entre un double rayon tout autour contenus.
    Vous pouvez, pour facteurs, prendre en toute assurance
    La moitié du rayon et la circonférence;
    Mais, hélas! l'on n'a pu trouver par nul effort
    De la courbe au rayon l'introuvable rapport.
    N'espérons pas qu'ici notre ignorance fasse
    Ce que n'ont pas pu faire et _Lagrange_ et _Laplace_:
    D'ailleurs nous avons l'art d'en approcher si bien
    Qu'un rapport plus parfait ne servirait à rien.
    Il suffit qu'à présent votre tête possède
    Celui qu'avait trouvé notre maître Archimède.
    IL en est un plus sûr, mais aussi moins succinct;
    C'est celui de cent treize à trois cent cinquant'-cinq:
    Il approche du but à des millionnièmes.
    L'autre, vous le savez, est les vingt-deux septièmes;
    Multipliez par lui le quarré du rayon,
    Vous aurez, sur-le-champ, tout cercle en question.
    Vous savez comment sont deux semblables surfaces:
    Leur rapport est celui des quarrés de leurs faces.
    Les cercles suivent donc les quarrés des rayons:
    L'on abrège par là les opérations.
    C'est un simple calcul dont tous les jours on use,
    Ainsi que du quarré fait sur l'hypothénuse,
    Qui vaut les deux quarrés construits sur l'angle droit,
    Propriété chez nous renommée à bon droit.

    Maints problèmes jolis sont résolus par elle;
    Par elle, j'ai de deux la racine fidelle.


DES PLANS.

    Il est de la nature et l'essence des plans
    Que la droite sur eux s'applique en tous les sens:
    D'où s'en suit que deux plans forment un plan unique,
    Lorsque l'un par trois points à l'autre communique;
    Je veux dire trois points sur deux lignes placés.
    Pour toute section une ligne est assez:
    Même on peut (mais le cas est rare et difficile)
    Par une même ligne en faire passer mille.
    Cette exiguité fait peine à concevoir;
    Mais avec la chicane il n'est point de savoir.
    Sur un plan une ligne est perpendiculaire,
    Lorsque deux angles droits à son pied l'on repaire:
    Et si par elle était un nouveau plan conduit,
    Droit serait l'angle plan que l'on aurait produit.
    Par-là nous découvrons les moyens nécessaires
    Pour faire que les plans soient perpendiculaires.
    Quant aux angles divers, par leur concours formés,
    C'est sur la section qu'ils seront estimés.
    Lorsqu'un tiers plan survient sur deux plans parallèles,
    Il fait deux sections parallèles entre elles;
    Et l'on retrouve ici les angles différens
    Que l'on démontre égaux par les correspondans.


SOLIDES.

    Les plans incessamment sont liés aux solides.
    Quand des plans de niveau coupent deux pyramides,
    On a des sections qui, semblables d'ailleurs,
    Marchent dans le rapport des quarrés des hauteurs.
    Si donc même hauteur règne entre deux d'entre elles,
    Toutes ces sections sont proportionnelles,
    Et des bases dès-lors dépend l'égalité,
    En volume total ou bien solidité:
    Car égale trouvant une base première,
    Égale aussi sera la tranche élémentaire,
    Dont on peut concevoir ces deux corps composés;
    Tels à Lafère on voit les boulets entassés.
    Mais vous m'interrompez: au nom de pyramide,
    Votre esprit a déjà franchi la plage humide;
    Il s'égare déjà dans ces célèbres lieux,
    Dont le sol a nourri tant d'hommes et de dieux;
    Dont le premier Consul, par plus d'une victoire,
    Après quatre mille ans ressuscita la gloire.
    Déjà vous prétendez mesurer de vos mains
    Ces tombeaux respectés du temps et des Romains.
    Mais par cuber le prisme il faut que l'on procède;
    Il en est un nommé parallélipipède,
    Dont la solidité facilement se voit:
    La figure en relief la fait toucher au doigt.
    Il faut multiplier le côté par la base:
    Dans cette règle-ci, le prisme droit se case;
    Et quant au prisme oblique, on le dit à bon droit
    Ayant même hauteur, égale au prisme droit.
    D'ailleurs tout prisme en lui contient trois pyramides:
    Ainsi, pour revenir à ces derniers solides,
    Prenez avec la base un tiers de la hauteur,
    Et faites le produit de ce double facteur.
    Par base de solide, on entend la surface
    Du plan horizontal sur qui le corps se place.
    Il en est où la base est bonne en tous les sens,
    La pyramide à quatre, et le prisme à six plans.
    Plus nombreux en côtés, ces deux-ci vont nous peindre
    La pyramide un cône et le prisme un cylindre.

    Semblablement la sphère a su se convertir
    En cent cônes allant à son centre aboutir,
    Et qui trouvent chacun leur base à sa surface:
    Cette surface seule est ce qui m'embarrasse;
    Mais un détour permis en ces sortes de cas,
    Par le cône tronqué me tire d'embarras,
    Et me fait voir qu'il faut prendre le pérymètre,
    Et le multiplier par le seul diamètre.
    Pour la sphère on a donc triple dimension,
    Axe, circonférence, et le tiers du rayon.
    Par ce tiers, du secteur multipliez la zone,
    Et pour faire un segment, retranchez-en le cône.
    Le rapport de la sphère à son axe cubé
    Sur onze et vingt-et-un est à-peu-près tombé.
    Quatre cercles facteurs du sixième de l'axe
    Aux deux tiers du cylindre en réduisent la taxe:
    Et ce qui paraîtra surprenant en ceci,
    C'est qu'on a ce rapport aux surfaces aussi.
    Le cône inscrit en eux, pour un tiers intercède;
    C'est ce qu'a le premier découvert Archimède:
    Aux traces qu'en portait un informe carreau,
    Cicéron transporté reconnut son tombeau.
    Quel beau secret encore Archimède nous donne,
    Lorsque dans le fluide il plonge sa couronne:
    L'on peut cuber ainsi tout corps irrégulier,
    Et sachant de chacun le poids particulier,
    Des métaux confondus connaître l'alliage,
    En faire le départ sans altérer l'ouvrage.

    Pour termes de rapport dans les solidités,
    Prenez les cubes faits des semblables côtés.
    Le vulgaire souvent, trompé par l'apparence,
    Dans ces sortes de cas montre son ignorance,
    Prenant la ligne au lieu du cube ou du quarré;
    Et dans de faux calculs il se trouve égaré.
    Si cette erreur, par fois, n'est pas fort dangereuse,
    Du moins pour l'homme instruit elle est toujours honteuse.
    N'allez pas hésiter sur un pareil sujet.
    Mille autres vérités seraient de mon objet;
    Mais je m'arrête ici, content pour toute gloire,
    Si mes vers quelquefois aident votre mémoire.
    De plaire et de charmer ils n'ont pas l'heureux don:
    Notre langue n'est pas la langue d'Apollon.
    Mais, sans que le compas sur la lyre anticipe,
    La rime peut servir à graver le principe
    Indispensable clef qui seule peut ouvrir
    Cette noble carrière où vous voulez courir.
    Puissiez-vous quelque jour avec gloire y paraître!
    Puissiez-vous de bien loin devancer votre maître!
    Aidez-vous de Bossut, de Monge et de Lacroix;
    Et sans cesse étendant vos plaisirs et vos droits,
    Atteignez, s'il se peut, à ce sublime ouvrage
    Qui fait le désespoir des savans de notre âge.
    L'esprit s'aiguise encore de l'obstacle irrité:
    Par un adolescent[4] Laplace est commenté.

  [4] Byot, examinateur de l'école polytechnique.

    Mais lorsque vous suivrez les astres dans les cieux,
    N'en jetez pas sur nous un regard dédaigneux:
    Simples dans vos discours, sages dans vos systèmes,
    Défiez-vous toujours et d'eux et de vous-mêmes.




NOTES DE L'AUTEUR.


    Que du cercle complet l'angle soit diviseur.
    A l'heureux exagone accordez-en l'honneur.

Pour qu'on puisse couvrir une surface _exactement_ avec des polygones
réguliers de même espèce, il faut que l'angle intérieur soit tel, que,
répété un certain nombre de fois, il fasse 360 degrés.

Ainsi l'angle du quarré étant de 90 degrés, quatre quarrés se rangeront
autour d'un même point sans laisser aucun intervalle. L'angle du
triangle équilatéral étant de 60 degrés, six triangles équilatéraux se
rangeront aussi _exactement_ autour d'un même point. Ces deux figures
sont donc propres à couvrir une surface.

Mais quoiqu'elles soient et l'autre comprises dans la dénomination
générique de polygone, cependant ce nom se donne plus particulièrement
aux figures qui ont plus de quatre côtés. Or, de toutes ces figures,
l'exagone est la seule qui satisfasse à la condition; car, entre 90 et
120, il n'y a aucun diviseur exact de 360, et il n'y en a aucun non plus
de 120 à 180.

    Le cercle est composé de triangles aigus,
    Entre un double rayon tout autour contenus.

Une analogie directe nous conduit à juger le cercle de même condition
que les polygones, et à regarder sa surface comme un composé de
triangles, ou comme un seul triangle qui a la circonférence pour base et
le rayon pour hauteur.

Cependant cette manière de considérer le cercle, qui remonte jusqu'à la
naissance du l'art, à été jugée insuffisante par les grands maîtres de
ce siècle, et ce n'est pas sans raison. Ils veulent nous apprendre à ne
pas nous contenter en géométrie des preuves d'analogie et de sentiment,
et à tout soumettre, autant qu'il est possible, à la rigueur du calcul.

D'ailleurs les méthodes qu'ils emploient dans ce cas-ci et dans ceux qui
en dépendent, n'excluent jamais entièrement l'idée d'infini, et ne sont,
en quelque sorte, que des vérifications, puisqu'on est toujours obligé
de supposer et de mettre en avant l'expression que l'on est censé
chercher.

    Nous avons l'art d'en approcher si bien,
    Qu'un rapport plus parfait ne servirait de rien.

En effet le rapport de 113 à 355, d'Adrien Métius, ayant un quotient
vrai jusqu'au septième chiffre décimal, donne celui de 1:3,1415926, ou
celui de 10000000:31415926. C'est-à-dire, qu'il faudrait un cercle dont
le rayon eût plus de dix millions de pieds ou de 666 lieues de diamètre,
pour qu'il y eût un pied d'erreur dans la circonférence calculée sur le
rapport.

Mais l'on pousse quand on veut l'approximation encore plus loin, et
presque à l'infini, puisqu'on a déterminé jusqu'au vingt-septième
chiffre décimal.




ERRATA.


Épitre Dédicatoire, vers 18, sans la gloire; _lisez:_ sans gloire.

_Idem_, vers 39, être content; _lisez:_ être satisfait.

Page 14, après le vers 26, on a omis ces deux-ci:

    Il en est où la base est bonne en tous les sens,
    La pyramide à quatre, et le prisme à six plans.

Il est inutile d'observer que, pour entendre ces sortes de vers, il faut
être déjà un peu géomètre. Il s'agit ici de la pyramide triangulaire et
du prisme quarré, dans lesquels on prend pour base une quelconque des
faces, indifféremment.


L'Auteur donne actuellement des Leçons à Paris, chez lui et en ville.


---------------------
NOTE DU TRANSCRIPTEUR

On a effectué les corrections signalées dans les errata. L'orthographe
est conforme à l'original.






End of Project Gutenberg's La géométrie en vers techniques, by Lyon Des Roys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LA GÉOMÉTRIE EN VERS TECHNIQUES ***

***** This file should be named 26566-8.txt or 26566-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/5/6/26566/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
